KEP-3751: Kubernetes VolumeAttributesClass ModifyVolume (#3780)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-storage/3751-volume-provisioned-io/README.md

**Watching changes in the PVC object**, if the VolumeAttributesClass changes, it will trigger a ModifyVolume call.

```
apiVersion: storage.k8s.io/v1alpha1
kind: VolumeAttributesClass
metadata:
  name: gold
parameters:
  iops: "1000"
  throughput: "100MiB/s"
```

```
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: test-pv-claim
spec:
  storageClassName: csi-sc-example
  VolumeAttributesClassName: gold
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteOnce
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 64Gi
```

Under the modify volume call, it will pass in the `VolumeAttributesClass `object and do the update operation based on the `VolumeAttributesClass` parameters.

##### Pros:

*   Provide an automation of updating all PVCs with the new set of performance related parameters 

##### Cons:

*   Unknown scaling problems for clusters with large numbers of volumes
*   Partial update failures are difficult to communicate with the overall system

### Appendix - Current SPs Case Study

> The following cloud providers participated in the discussion:

Reviewer: "storage providers" instead of "cloud providers"

## Motivation

In practice, workloads may scale vertically up to a certain point but then must partition horizontally. The system scales up and down horizontally with partition and at the same time provides a software layer to manage key attributes iops/throughput independently from capacity.

Currently after CreateVolume with provider specific parameters pass in storage class, Kubernetes does not handle update of volume attributes other than capacity. The only way to achieve this is to use the cloud provider's API directly to modify iops and throughput. This creates frictions of managing storage resources on k8s. Allowing Resources to be changed without managing it through different provider's APIs directly simplifies this whole process.

> 

Reviewer 2: Can you reword this section to say that iops/throughput is an example of the attributes that can be modified.

Author: I added "such as" in front of iops/throughput

* ResourceQuota enforcement by VolumeAttributesClass

### Non-Goals

* OS-level IO volume attributes, for example cgroup policy
* Inter-pod volume attributes. This KEP is restricted to what attributes can be defined on a volume.
* Scheduling based on total specific volume attributes limits of a node. For example, total throughput for many cloud provider network attached storage volumes is limited by instance network bandwidth and may prevent achieving the provisioned IO. Scheduling to mitigate these factors is out of scope but it should be considered as a future extension of this KEP.

## Proposal

### Kubernetes API
We need to add a new resource object VolumeAttributesClass to Kubernetes API, also a new admission controller and vac protection controller. Please see more in [Design Details](#bookmark=id.wtvwymf8202g).

The reason why we cannot use StorageClass.parameters is because StorageClass is immutable today, the design is keeping the naming opaque as mutable\_parameters because CSI was initially designed to support more than just Kubernetes, VolumeAttributesClass is similar to StorageClass, these are purely a Kubernetes-only concept and not a storage provider concept. 

> 

Reviewer 2: We allow the storageClassName in a PVC to be modified.  We don't allow "parameters" within a VolumeAttributesClass to be modified, right?  We've rejected the proposal that watches parameters update in a given class.

Author: This is just to explain why we do not use the parameters in StorageClass for this feature and we need a new VolumeAttributesClass.

  ...
  // Name of the VolumeAttributesClass required by the claim.
  // More info: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/#class-1
  // +optional
  VolumeAttributesClassName *string
  ...
}

// PersistentVolumeClaimStatus represents the status of PV claim
type PersistentVolumeClaimStatus struct {
  ...
  VolumeAttributesClassName string
  ModifyVolumeStatus *PersistentVolumeClaimModifyVolumeStatus
  ...
}

// +enum
type PersistentVolumeClaimModifyVolumeStatus string

const (
  // When modify volume is complete, the empty string is set by modify volume controller.
  PersistentVolumeClaimNoModifyVolumeInProgress PersistentVolumeClaimModifyVolumeStatus = ""
  // State set when modify volume controller starts modifying the volume in control-plane
  PersistentVolumeClaimControllerModifyVolumeInProgress PersistentVolumeClaimModifyVolumeStatus = "ControllerModifyVolumeInProgress"
  // State set when modify volume has failed in modify volume controller with a terminal error.
  // Transient errors such as timeout should not set this status and should leave ModifyVolumeStatus
  // unmodified, so as modify volume controller can resume the volume modification.

>   PersistentVolumeClaimControllerModifyVolumeFailed PersistentVolumeClaimModifyVolumeStatus = "ControllerModifyVolumeFailed"

Reviewer 3: nit - these conditions do not match conditions that already exist in recovery from resize failure APIs. Are we going to reuse the conditions?

Reviewer 3: It looks like we introducing new statuses... which is fine tbh. Was just wondering.

kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: test-pv-claim
spec:
  storageClassName: csi-sc-example
  VolumeAttributesClassName: gold
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteOnce
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 64Gi
```

#### Administrator Quota Restrictions

A cluster admin wants to control costs while giving application developers the freedom to optimize their applications. They set a per VolumeAttributesClass limit to the maximum count of PVCs that can be specified in a cluster ResourceQuota. When an application dev modifies a PVC to request a higher tier of VolumeAttributesClass but there is no quota, the request is rejected. As the ResourceQuota is a cluster-scoped object, only the cluster admin and not application devs can change limits.

An example of define ResourceQuota for VolumeAttributesClass:

```
apiVersion: v1
kind: ResourceQuota
metadata:
  name: vacquota
spec:
  hard:
  // Across all persistent volume claims associated with the 
  // <volume-attributes-class-name>, the total number of persistent volume claims 
  // that can exist in the namespace.
<volume-attributes-class-name>.VolumeAttributesClass.storage.k8s.io/persistentvolumeclaims: "5" 
  ...
```

> 

Reviewer 3: Did we document the case where what happens if an admin modifies parameters of `VolumeAttribtueClass` ? I didn't see mention of the use case anywhere.

Author: The above example in line 342

```
apiVersion: storage.k8s.io/v1alpha1
kind: VolumeAttributesClass
metadata:
  name: gold
parameters:
  iops: "1000"
  throughput: "100MiB/s"
```

Author: Oh i think you were mentioning if the parameters are mutable. The parameters are immutable in the VAC but it is mutable in CSI spec.

```
// ControllerServer is the server API for Controller service.
type ControllerServer interface {
        ...
    rpc ControllerModifyVolume (ModifyVolumeRequest)
￼        returns (ModifyVolumeResponse) {
￼            option (alpha_method) = true;
￼        }
        ...
}

message ModifyVolumeRequest {
  // Contains identity information for the existing volume.
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  string volume_id = 1
  // This field is OPTIONAL.This allows the CO to specify the
  // mutable parameters to apply. 
  map<string, string> mutable_parameters = 2;
}
message ModifyVolumeResponse {}

message CreateVolumeRequest {
  ...
  // See CreateVolumeRequest.parameters.
  // This field is OPTIONAL.
  map<string, string> parameters = 4;
  // This field is OPTIONAL. This allows the CO to specify the
  // volume attributes class parameters to apply. 
  map<string, string> mutable_parameters = 8;
}
```

### User Stories (Optional)

> #### Provisioned Create

Author: Track the same discussion above for this topic and resolve this comment.

* Volume attributes modifiable non disruptively by workload developers
* ResourceQuota enforcement by VolumeAttributesClass

### Non-Goals

* OS-level IO volume attributes, for example cgroup policy
* Inter-pod volume attributes. This KEP is restricted to what attributes can be defined on a volume.
* Scheduling based on total specific volume attributes limits of a node. For example, total throughput for many cloud provider network attached storage volumes is limited by instance network bandwidth and may prevent achieving the provisioned IO. Scheduling to mitigate these factors is out of scope but it should be considered as a future extension of this KEP.

## Proposal

### Kubernetes API
We need to add a new resource object VolumeAttributesClass to Kubernetes API, also a new admission controller and vac protection controller. Please see more in [Design Details](#bookmark=id.wtvwymf8202g).

```
type VolumeAttributesClass struct {
  metav1.TypeMeta
  // +optional
  metav1.ObjectMeta

  // Spec defines the behavior of a VolumeAttributesClass.
  // +optional
  Spec VolumeAttributesClassSpec
}

type VolumeAttributesClassSpec struct {

>   // Name of the drive

Author: Nice catch :D

  DriverName string
  // This field is OPTIONAL.This allows the CO to specify the
  // volume attributes class parameters to apply. 
  Parameters map[string]string
}

type PersistentVolumeSpec struct {
  ...
  // Name of VolumeAttributesClass to which this persistent volume belongs. Empty value
  // means that this volume does not belong to any VolumeAttributesClass.
  // +optional

>   VolumeAttributesClassName string

Author: Added to user story, it is up to the cluster admin to make sure the parameters are matching.

>   VolumeAttributesClassName string

Reviewer 3: This is basically same case as , what if an admin modifies attributes of `VolumeAttributeClass` without explicitly modifying the pvc.

>   VolumeAttributesClassName string

Reviewer 2: Should we make VolumeAttributesClass parameters immutable since we are not going to watch for its update in the current design?
The "immutable_parameters" in CSI spec are from two different VolumeAttributessClasses.

>   VolumeAttributesClassName string

Author: Change it to immutable.

  ...
}

type PersistentVolumeClaimSpec struct {
  ...
  // Name of the VolumeAttributesClass required by the claim.
  // More info: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/#class-1
  // +optional

>   VolumeAttributesClassName *string

Author: We can support defaulting VolumeAttributesClass but it may come in later phrases of this feature.

  ...
}

// PersistentVolumeClaimStatus represents the status of PV claim
type PersistentVolumeClaimStatus struct {
  ...

>   VolumeAttributesClassName string

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure I fully understand the relationship between `PersistentVolumeSpec.VolumeAttributesClassName`, `PersistentVolumeClaimSpec.VolumeAttributesClassName` and `PersistentVolumeClaimStatus.VolumeAttributesClassName`.

I understand from the examples how `PersistentVolumeClaimSpec.VolumeAttributesClassName` is used. What are the other two for?

Author: So we need to add PVSpec is for the preprovisioned volume scenario to the design below?

  ModifyVolumeStatus *PersistentVolumeClaimModifyVolumeStatus
  ...
}

// +enum
type PersistentVolumeClaimModifyVolumeStatus string

const (

>   // When modify volume is complete, the empty string is set by modify volume controller or kubelet.

Author: Oh no, it was added when we thought about node expansion.

  // Transient errors such as timeout should not set this status and should leave ModifyVolumeStatus
  // unmodified, so as modify volume controller can resume the volume modification.
  PersistentVolumeClaimControllerModifyVolumeFailed PersistentVolumeClaimModifyVolumeStatus = "ControllerModifyVolumeFailed"
)

```

#### Quota

Cluster administrators can use K8s quota to specify how many PVCs can use a specific VolumeAttributesClass. There is no fine grained parameter specific quota control for this feature. Fine grained attributes key-value pair quota is not in scope of this KEP.

An example of define ResourceQuota for VolumeAttributesClass:

```
apiVersion: v1
kind: ResourceQuota
metadata:
  name: vacquota
spec:
  hard:
  // Across all persistent volume claims associated with the 
  // <volume-attributes-class-name>, the total number of persistent volume claims 
  // that can exist in the namespace.
<volume-attributes-class-name>.VolumeAttributesClass.storage.k8s.io/persistentvolumeclaims: "5" 
  ...
```

### CSI API
The CSI create request will be extended to add mutable parameters. A new ControllerModifyVolume RPC will be added.

> The reason why we cannot use StorageClass.parameters is because StorageClass is immutable today, the design is keeping the naming opaque as mutable\_parameters because CSI was initially designed to support more than just Kubernetes, VolumeAttributesClass is similar to StorageClass, these are purely a Kubernetes-only concept and not a storage provider concept. 

Author: The errors are listed in the CSI Spec change, do we need to duplicate here as well?

> The reason why we cannot use StorageClass.parameters is because StorageClass is immutable today, the design is keeping the naming opaque as mutable\_parameters because CSI was initially designed to support more than just Kubernetes, VolumeAttributesClass is similar to StorageClass, these are purely a Kubernetes-only concept and not a storage provider concept. 

Reviewer: I would keep the two PRs in sync to avoid confusion

```
apiVersion: storage.k8s.io/v1alpha1
kind: VolumeAttributesClass
metadata:
  name: silver
parameters:
  iops: "500"
  throughput: "50MiB/s"
```

```
apiVersion: storage.k8s.io/v1
kind: StorageClass
metadata:
  name: csi-gcepd
provisioner: pd.csi.storage.gke.io
volumeBindingMode: WaitForFirstConsumer
```

The driver is responsible for parsing and validating these parameters and making sure duplicate configuration is not allowed. End users will specify  the VolumeAttributesClass in the PVC object:

```
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: test-pv-claim
spec:
  storageClassName: csi-sc-example
  VolumeAttributesClassName: silver
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteOnce
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 64Gi
```

#### Volume Attributes Updates

A customer monitors the performance of a Cassandra cluster. They notice that volume IO is causing a bottleneck in performance. They update the PVCs in question by changing to a higher tier VolumeAttributesClass managed by the cluster administrator to increase the provisioned IO and realize improved performance.

Before:

```
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: test-pv-claim

> spec:

Author: But does PVC.Status show up in the yaml definition? Or you are asking for a diagram?

> spec:

Reviewer: When a user creates an object, there is no status, but if the user gets the object back, they will see a status get populated

> spec:

Author: Here is a diagram of how the Status changes: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3780/files#diff-246482d82449d6f8ae73236fde854f069e1220fe9442dbc244bb7fa808bd82c5

  storageClassName: csi-sc-example
  VolumeAttributesClassName: silver
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteOnce
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 64Gi
```

After:

```
apiVersion: storage.k8s.io/v1alpha1
kind: VolumeAttributesClass
metadata:
  name: gold
parameters:
  iops: "1000"

>   throughput: "100MiB/s"

Author: Can we just add a comment to point out the difference between these two? They are pretty close in this doc. I do not think copying over make sense.

```

```
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: test-pv-claim
spec:
  storageClassName: csi-sc-example
  VolumeAttributesClassName: gold
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteOnce
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 64Gi
```

#### Administrator Quota Restrictions

A cluster admin wants to control costs while giving application developers the freedom to optimize their applications. They set a per VolumeAttributesClass limit to the maximum count of PVCs that can be specified in a cluster ResourceQuota. When an application dev modifies a PVC to request a higher tier of VolumeAttributesClass but there is no quota, the request is rejected. As the ResourceQuota is a cluster-scoped object, only the cluster admin and not application devs can change limits.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

The parameters in VolumeAttributesClass are opaque. This gives different cloud providers flexibility but at the same time it is up to the specific driver to verify the values set in the parameters. The suggestion is to set immutable parameters in StorageClass and mutable parameters in VolumeAttributesClass.

### Risks and Mitigations

> Users may configure both parameters in StorageClass and parameters in VolumeAttributesClass differently. The mitigation here is to provide a guideline of solving conflicts. If the MODIFY\_VOLUME capability is present, VolumeAttributesClass should be honored.

Author: Yes

## Design Details

As part of this proposal, we are proposing:

### 1. Add Create/Delete VolumeAttributesClass support in Kubernetes including vac\_admission\_controller and vac\_protection\_controller for deletion protection. 

#### VolumeAttributesClass Deletion Protection

> While a VolumeAttributesClass is referenced by any PVC, we will prevent the object from being deleted by adding a finalizer([reference](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/plugin/pkg/admission/storage/storageobjectinuseprotection/admission.go)). 

Author: I am not sure if this will be a frequently used feature. We can support it at GA or put it as P2. Do we have any similar example in the code base?

> While a VolumeAttributesClass is referenced by any PVC, we will prevent the object from being deleted by adding a finalizer([reference](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/plugin/pkg/admission/storage/storageobjectinuseprotection/admission.go)). 

Reviewer: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-persistent-volume-storage/#create-a-persistentvolume

I think importing an existing volume is a common enough scenario that we should support it.

The VACObjectInUseProtection admission controller sets the finalizer on all VolumeAttributesClasses. VACProtectionController removes the finalizer when it's not referenced. This prevents users from deleting a VolumeAttributesClass that's used by a PVC.

There are a few conditions that will trigger add/remove pvc finalizers in the VolumeAttributesClass:

> 1. PVC created with a VolumeAttributesClass

Author: The PVC should be in the state of pending.

> 1. PVC created with a VolumeAttributesClass

Reviewer: So the PVC will be created, but then the admission controller would have already run and won't run again. So in this scenario, the VAC protection controller would have to handle adding the finalizer. But then I think it will be prone to races. 

@jsafrane I know we initially put the pvc/pv protection controller as a separate controller to not make the pv controller more complicated, but I wonder if in this case it would be simpler to have the finalizer logic inline with pv controller and external-resizer, which are the ones that gate the CSI calls. I think import PV case may still be tricky though to be race free.

    * Check VolumeAttributesClass is being deleted and PVC creation failed
3. PVC updated to a different VolumeAttributesClass
    * The **VACProtectionController** will remove PVC finalizer in previous VolumeAttributesClass if after listing all the PVCs and confirmed that this PVC is the last one that is consuming the previous VolumeAttributesClass

    The **VACObjectInUseProtection admission controller**:
    * Check if the new VolumeAttributesClass already has a protection finalizer
    * Add the finalizer to the new VolumeAttributesClass if there is none 
4. PVC updated to a different VolumeAttributesClass that is being deleted
    The **VACObjectInUseProtection admission controller**:
    * Check VolumeAttributesClass is being deleted and PVC update failed
5. PVC has a VolumeAttributesClass and this PVC is deleted
    * The **VACProtectionController** will remove finalizer in the VolumeAttributesClass only if after listing all the PVCs and confirm that this PVC is the last one that is consuming the VolumeAttributesClass
6. Delete a VolumeAttributesClass while there is **kubernetes.io/vac-protection** finalizer associated with this VolumeAttributesClass

>     * Deletion failed

Reviewer: Once the final reference is gone, the finalizer will be removed and then the object will be deleted. There is no need to delete again because the object already has a deletionTimestamp on it.

        AddFunc: e.vacAddedUpdated,
        UpdateFunc: func(old, new interface{}) {
                e.vacAddedUpdated(new)
        },
})

pvcInformer.Informer().AddEventHandler(cache.ResourceEventHandlerFuncs{
        AddFunc: func(obj interface{}) {
                e.pvcAddedDeletedUpdated(nil, obj, false)
        },
        DeleteFunc: func(obj interface{}) {
                e.pvcAddedDeletedUpdated(nil, obj, true)
        },
        UpdateFunc: func(old, new interface{}) {
                e.pvcAddedDeletedUpdated(old, new, false)
        },
})

```

After a delete VolumeAttributesClass request is made, it will add a deletionTimestamp and then confirm with the vac\_protection\_controller to see if there are any finalizers of that VolumeAttributesClass. The VolumeAttributesClass will only be deleted if there are no more finalizers.

If the user decides to create a new VolumeAttributesClass with the exact same name, the creation will fail because the Kubernetes API server will refuse creating new objects with the same name until the old objects are deleted.

![Delete VolumeAttributesClass Flow](./Delete_VolumeAttributesClass.png)

> #### Create PVC

Author: There is a diagram for all these operations Create_PVC.png etc. any details you want to add?

> #### Create PVC

Reviewer: I think it is missing details on how CSI createvolume gets called with the VolumeAttributes

The pvc config will have a new field VolumeAttributesClassName.

A new finalizer **kubernetes.io/vac-protection** will be added to the VolumeAttributesClass the PVC is consuming from a new vacProtectionController. We also need a new admission controller [vacobjectinuseprotection](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/tree/master/plugin/pkg/admission/storage)/admission.go.

![Create PVC Flow](./Create_PVC.png)

#### Delete PVC

Deleting a PVC will trigger a list PVCs call and decide if we need to remove the finalizer **[kubernetes.io/vac-protection](kubernetes.io/vpc-protection) **via the vac\_protection\_controller.

![Delete PVC Flow](./Delete_PVC.png)

> ### 2. Update quota code to include and validate VolumeAttributesClass usage of PVCs.

Reviewer 3: It should work fine IMO. The quota code will not see same PVC against old and new `VolumeAttributeClass` at the same time.

> ### 2. Update quota code to include and validate VolumeAttributesClass usage of PVCs.

Author: The quota code will not see same PVC against old and new VolumeAttributeClass at the same time. <-- where did you get the information? The public doc does not explain how quota works behind the scene at all.

> ### 2. Update quota code to include and validate VolumeAttributesClass usage of PVCs.

Reviewer: @gnufied don't we need to count the PVC against both old and new VAC until the modification has been successful? @sunnylovestiramisu my ask here is to outline the key points of the quota logic we will need to implement

> #### Modify PVC

Author: It is not, the problem is that the #### sessions intervened with the ### No. sessions. Basically it is breaking down by operation + by different components.

> #### Modify PVC

Reviewer: Maybe each of the components can have subsections for the relevant operations. So you can add a numbered section for CSI sidecar components and how they handle create/delete/modify pvc. I think the existing section 3 can be part of that flow. Actually 3 and 4 are both related to the sidecars, so maybe they can be combined.

> #### Modify PVC

Author: I changed it to proposed changes session with the 1-5 bullet points, and then the other Modify PVC etc. as detailed design.

```
apiVersion: storage.k8s.io/v1alpha1
kind: VolumeAttributesClass
metadata:
  name: gold
parameters:
  iops: "1000"
  throughput: "100MiB/s"
```

```
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: test-pv-claim
spec:
  storageClassName: csi-sc-example
  VolumeAttributesClassName: gold
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteOnce
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 64Gi
```

Under the ModifyVolume call, it will pass in the mutable parameters and do the update operation based on the `VolumeAttributesClass` parameters.

### 5. Add new operation metrics for ModifyVolume operations

```
- controller modify volume operation duration:
    - Metric name: storage_operation_duration_seconds{operation_name=modify_volume}
    - [Optional] Aggregation method: percentile
    - Components exposing the metric: kube-controller-manager
- controller modify volume operation errors:
    - Metric name: storage_operation_errors_total{operation_name=modify_volume}
    - [Optional] Aggregation method: cumulative counter
    - Components exposing the metric: kube-controller-manager
```

### Implementation & Handling Failure

> VolumeAttributesClass parameters can be considered as best-effort parameters, the CSI driver should report the status of bad parameters and the volume would fall back to a workable default configuration.

Author: Added

### Test Plan

* Basic unit tests for performance and quota system.
* API conformance tests
* E2E tests using mock driver to cause failure on create, update and recovering cases
  * [K8s storage framework](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/tree/master/test/e2e/storage/testsuites)
  * [csi-tes](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/csi-test)
* Test coverage of quota usage with ResourceQuota and LimitRange

##### Prerequisite testing updates

##### Unit tests

##### Integration tests

<!--
This question should be filled when targeting a release.
For Alpha, describe what tests will be added to ensure proper quality of the enhancement.

For Beta and GA, add links to added tests together with links to k8s-triage for those tests:
https://storage.googleapis.com/k8s-triage/index.html

> -->

Reviewer 4: Put something here?

##### e2e tests

<!--
This question should be filled when targeting a release.
For Alpha, describe what tests will be added to ensure proper quality of the enhancement.

For Beta and GA, add links to added tests together with links to k8s-triage for those tests:
https://storage.googleapis.com/k8s-triage/index.html

We expect no non-infra related flakes in the last month as a GA graduation criteria.

> -->

Reviewer 4: And here?

### Graduation Criteria

#### Alpha

- Feature in 1.28 behind the VolumeAttributesClass feature gate which is set to a default of false
- Add basic unit tests

#### Alpha -> Beta
- Unit tests and e2e tests outlined in design proposal implemented

> #### Beta

Reviewer: Should we add some criteria for some X number of CSI drivers implementing and testing this?

Author: What is the convention? If the convention has this process we can add this. How difficult is to involve different providers for testing?

> - Beta in 1.29: Since this feature is an expansion of the existing capacity usage flow, we are going to move this to beta with enhanced e2e and test coverage 

Author: This is not about resizing, expansion means expanding the use of external-resizer

> - Beta in 1.29: Since this feature is an expansion of the existing capacity usage flow, we are going to move this to beta with enhanced e2e and test coverage 

Reviewer: Maybe add more details out what kinds of new tests will be added

#### GA

- GA in 1.30, an issue board will be created to track issues, and all major issues should be fixed before GA.
- No users complaining about the new behavior

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

No change in cluster upgrade / downgrade process.

> ### Version Skew Strategy

Reviewer 4: super nit: This sounds more like feature flag combinations than version skew.  It is a very useful table.

Author: I copied this from the template, should I rename this session to Feature flag combinations?

> This feature is implemented only in the API server and KCM and controlled by

Author: All three will be involved because of deletion protection. Added to the other comment as well.

`VolumeProvisionedIO` feature gate. Following cases may happen:

| API server | external-resizer | Behavior                                                                                                                         |
|------------|-----|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| off | off | Existing Kubernetes behavior.                                                                                                    |
| on | off| Existing Kubernetes behavior, API server gets requests of iops/throughput but does not act on it

> | off | on | external-resizer should not get any event to update iops/throughput, the current resize flow stays the same |

Reviewer 4: For this off/on case, what happens there are already `VolumeAttributesClassName` values (and the corresponding attribute objects) written to storage (i.e. from when the feature was previously enabled on the api server)?

Author: If there is no change of VolumeAttributesClassName in the PVC, no modify volume call will be triggered. 
But let say if after it is off and then turn it on again, and the end user create a pvc with that pre-exist VolumeAttributesClassName, a modify volume call will be executed.

| on | on | New behavior.                                                                                                                    |

## Production Readiness Review Questionnaire

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

> - [ ] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [x] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
```

    - Feature gate name: VolumeProvisionedIO
    - Components depending on the feature gate: kube-apiserver, 
      external-resizer
- [ ] Other
    - Describe the mechanism:

###### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

No. 

###### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

Yes. It should be disabled in a reverse order of enabling the feature - 
first disable the feature in external-resizer then in API server. See "Version Skew 
Strategy" section above for more details.

###### What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?

No issues are expected. The case is exactly the same as when the feature is 

> enabled for the first time.

Reviewer 4: Do `VolumeAttributesClassName` values already written to storage (from before the feature was rolled back) become active again?

Author: It does not get active again because the PVC's VolumeAttributesClassName does not change.

Reviewer 4: Would you update the KEP to summarize that situation here?  My goal is to understand what happens when the feature is enabled, `VolumeAttributesClassName` is set, and then the feature is disabled and then reenabled again.

###### Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?

There is two new fields that needs to be handled in a special way. The feature 
gate just enables/disables a code path in external-resizer which is covered

> by new unit tests to add with the feature.

Reviewer 4: It sounds like you might already be doing everything needed here, but for clarity, can you confirm in this section as directly as possible that there will be a test that verifies that the feature is properly disabled when the feature flag is turned off?

These goals will help you determine what you need to measure (SLIs) in the next
question.
-->

###### What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to determine the health of the service?

- [ ] Metrics
    - Metric name: `controller_modify_volume_errors_total` and `controller_modify_volume_errors_total`
    - [Optional] Aggregation method:
    - Components exposing the metric: external-resizer

###### Are there any missing metrics that would be useful to have to improve observability of this feature?

<!--
Describe the metrics themselves and the reasons why they weren't added (e.g., cost,
implementation difficulties, etc.).
-->

### Dependencies

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.
-->

###### Does this feature depend on any specific services running in the cluster?

external-resizer.

### Scalability

<!--
For alpha, this section is encouraged: reviewers should consider these questions
and attempt to answer them.

For beta, this section is required: reviewers must answer these questions.

For GA, this section is required: approvers should be able to confirm the
previous answers based on experience in the field.
-->

> ###### Will enabling / using this feature result in any new API calls?

Reviewer: The VAC protection controller will be expensive because it needs to LIST PVCs and maybe PVs

Yes.

- API call type: PATCH PVC
- estimated throughput: low, only once for PVCs that have
  iops/throughput field gets updated in PVC
- originating component(s): kube-controller-manager

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in introducing new API types?

> Yes. ControllerModifyVolume.

Reviewer: This is asking about Kubernetes APIs, so it should be VolumeAttributeClass

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in any new calls to the cloud provider?

Yes. ControllerModifyVolume.

> ###### Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing size or count of the existing API objects?

Reviewer: Adding new fields to PVC + PV

> ###### Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing time taken by any operations covered by existing SLIs/SLOs?

Reviewer: It may impact CreateVolume

##### Cons:

*   Difficult to get consensus of what is iops/throughput among different storage providers
*   Not all the storage providers support independently configurable iops/throughput

#### Option 2: Opaque map in CreateVolume and ModifyVolume requests by end users

The users will set the volume performance parameters directly in the PVC:

```
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: test-pv-claim
spec:
  storageClassName: csi-sc-example
  volumePerformanceParameters:
    iops: "10000"
    throughput: "100Mib/s"
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteOnce
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 64Gi
```

The ModifyVolumeRequest in CSI spec will stay as:

```
message ModifyVolumeRequest {
  // Contains identity information for the existing volume.
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  string volume_id = 1
  // This field is OPTIONAL.This allows the CO to specify the
  // opaque volume parameters. 
  map<string, string> volume_parameters = 2;
}
```

##### Pros:

*   Flexible to fit into all the cloud providers
*   More flexibility to end users and no cluster administrator needs to be involved(also a con)

##### Cons:

> *   More unpredictable behaviors because it is an opaque map. Compared to the recommended approach that the cluster administrator actually has the control over the values.

Reviewer: The biggest con IMO is it's not portable across providers.

Author: Added.

**Watching changes in the PVC object**, if the VolumeAttributesClass changes, it will trigger a ModifyVolume call.

```
apiVersion: storage.k8s.io/v1alpha1
kind: VolumeAttributesClass
metadata:
  name: gold
parameters:
  iops: "1000"
  throughput: "100MiB/s"
```

```
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: test-pv-claim
spec:
  storageClassName: csi-sc-example
  VolumeAttributesClassName: gold
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteOnce
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 64Gi
```

Under the modify volume call, it will pass in the `VolumeAttributesClass `object and do the update operation based on the `VolumeAttributesClass` parameters.

##### Pros:

*   Provide an automation of updating all PVCs with the new set of performance related parameters 

##### Cons:

*   Unknown scaling problems for clusters with large numbers of volumes
*   Partial update failures are difficult to communicate with the overall system

> ### Appendix - Current SPs Case Study

Reviewer: +1 I think the EMC description has not been validated by someone from EMC so I wouldn't want to commit this

[Solidfire](https://www.netapp.com/pdf.html?item=/media/10502-tr-4644.pdf) supports a min, max, and burst IOPS per volume.

Solidfire definitions are:

*   Min IOPS. The Min IOPS configured for a volume is the guaranteed level of performance for a

volume. Performance does not drop below this level.

*   Max IOPS. The maximum number of sustained IOPS that the SolidFire cluster provides to a volume.
*   Burst IOPS. The maximum number of IOPS allowed in a short-burst scenario.

SolidFire uses Burst IOPS when a cluster is running in a state of low cluster IOPS utilization. A single volume can accrue Burst IOPS and use the credits to burst above its Max IOPS up to its Burst IOPS level for a set “burst period.” A volume can burst for up to 60 seconds if the cluster has the capacity to

accommodate the burst. A volume accrues 1 second of burst credit (up to a maximum of 60 seconds) for every second that the volume runs below its Max IOPS limit.

The current CSI Driver (NetApp Trident) does not currently have any support for specifying IOPS/Throughput.

#### EMC

> EMC only provides configuration for [capacity](https://docs.netapp.com/us-en/e-series-santricity/sm-storage/increase-capacity-of-a-volume.html). The control of iops and throughput is not independent of capacity.

Author: I kept it as it is when different cloud providers come to fill out this session.

* Scheduling based on total IO limits of a node. For example, total throughput for many cloud provider network attached storage volumes is limited by instance network bandwidth and may prevent achieving the provisioned IO. Scheduling to mitigate these factors is out of scope but it should be considered as a future extension of this KEP.

## Proposal

### Kubernetes API
Add two well-known ResourceName keys to the existing ResourceList type used in PersistentVolumeClaim.Spec.Resources.{Limits,Requests} and PersistentVolume.Spec.Capacity:
* ProvisionedIOPS
* ProvisionedThroughput
These values can be changed on a PersistentVolumeClaim, and will be reconciled against the storage provider in the same way as storage capacity resizing. The status of a PVC will reflect the currently provisioned IO as reported by the storage provider (in the same way that the status states the current size of the volume during a resize operation).

```
// Example:
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
...
spec:
  ...
  resources:
requests:
  storage: 4Gi
  throughput: "1.2M"
  iops: "160000"
// Vendors may add additional resources using Device Plugin syntax
// (azure.io/tunable: “100”)
```

> Add PVC Status field; change ResizeStatus alpha field to AllocatedResourceStatus map.

Reviewer 3: Can you explain API changes being proposed to `resizeStatus` field in more detail?

Author: This is added in the design details.

}
type ControllerUpdateIOProvisioningResponse struct {
        Iops int64
        Throughput int64
}
```

### Quota
Resize quota works by using Kubernetes resource quotas, which makes sure the cluster administrators and operators can restrict consumption and creation of cluster resources (such as CPU time, memory, and persistent storage) within a specified namespace. The LimitRange admission controller tracks usage to ensure the storage resource does not exceed resource minimum, maximum and ratio defined in any LimitRange present in the namespace.

```
apiVersion: v1
kind: ResourceQuota
metadata:
  name: quota
spec:
  hard:
    limits.iops: "200000"    // max for all containers in the namespace
    limits.throughput: 200
    requests.iops: "2000"    // max per request 
    requests.throughput: 20
    pods: "10"    // max number of pods allowed in the namespace
```

```
apiVersion: v1
kind: LimitRange
metadata:
  name: sample
spec:
  limits:
  - max:
      iops: 1500
      throughput: 10
    min:
      iops: 10
      throughput: 1
    default:
      iops: 100
      throughput: 5
    defaultRequest:
      iops: 100
      throughput: 20
    type: Container   
```

> QoS should have similar issues to resize (except that we have to solve reducing IO).

Reviewer 5: There should be some description about how current QoS setting in StorageClass parameters will affect namespace quota. Will it get copied (how?) from SCs to PVCs? Will this KEP disallow mixing QoS in StorageClass and in PVCs?

Author: Reading the release note - [admission_control_resource_quota.md](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/release-1.2/docs/design/admission_control_resource_quota.md), it is not so clear to me what is the existing behavior. But I think for the QoS feature, it is risky to trigger an update to force the params within the ResourceQuota etc. Maybe we should design it in a way that does not reduce and only increase Iops/throughput in this situation.

    - [ ] (R) Ensure GA e2e tests for meet requirements for [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md)
    - [ ] (R) Minimum Two Week Window for GA e2e tests to prove flake free
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
    - [ ] (R) [all GA Endpoints](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/1806) must be hit by [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md)
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

> Cloud providers and storage vendors offer volumes which allow specifying IO quality of service (QoS) parameters like IOPS or throughput and tuning them as workloads operate. ([1](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/requesting-ebs-volume-modifications.html), [2](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/disks/extreme-persistent-disk), [3](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/disks-types#premium-ssd-v2), [4](https://www.alibabacloud.com/help/en/elastic-compute-service/latest/essd-autopl)). While these parameters can be specified as storage class parameters to be set at provisioning time, Kubernetes has no API which allows changing them. Only capacity can be changed through the volume expansion API. This KEP proposes an extension to the Kubernetes Persistent Volume API to allow users to dynamically control these volume options.

Author: We are not prioritizing specific workloads here. This is more related(as you said) to performance control.

> Cloud providers and storage vendors offer volumes which allow specifying IO quality of service (QoS) parameters like IOPS or throughput and tuning them as workloads operate. ([1](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/requesting-ebs-volume-modifications.html), [2](https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/storage-data-transfer/learn-about-google-clouds-latest-storage-product-innovations), [3](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/disks/extreme-persistent-disk), [4](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/disks-types#premium-ssd-v2), [5](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/disks-types#ultra-disk-performance), [6](https://www.alibabacloud.com/help/en/elastic-compute-service/latest/essd-autopl)). While these parameters can be specified as storage class parameters to be set at provisioning time, Kubernetes has no API which allows changing them. Only capacity can be changed through the volume expansion API. This KEP proposes an extension to the Kubernetes Persistent Volume API to allow users to dynamically control these volume options.

Reviewer 2: Link [2](https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/storage-data-transfer/learn-about-google-clouds-latest-storage-product-innovations) looks like general product announcements.  Link [3](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/disks/extreme-persistent-disk) already has information on IOPs, etc. Can you remove link 2?

Can we pick one from [4](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/disks-types#premium-ssd-v2) and [5](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/disks-types#ultra-disk-performance) and only list that one?

## Motivation

### Goals

> * Cloud-provider independent specification of basic QoS parameters

Reviewer 2: Cloud-provider and storage vendor

* Scheduling based on total IO limits of a node. For example, total throughput for many cloud provider network attached storage volumes is limited by instance network bandwidth and may prevent achieving the provisioned IO. Scheduling to mitigate these factors is out of scope but it should be considered as a future extension of this KEP.

## Proposal

### Kubernetes API
Add two well-known ResourceName keys to the existing ResourceList type used in PersistentVolumeClaim.Spec.Resources.{Limits,Requests} and PersistentVolume.Spec.Capacity:
* ProvisionedIOPS
* ProvisionedThroughput
These values can be changed on a PersistentVolumeClaim, and will be reconciled against the storage provider in the same way as storage capacity resizing. The status of a PVC will reflect the currently provisioned IO as reported by the storage provider (in the same way that the status states the current size of the volume during a resize operation).

```
// Example:
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
...
spec:
  ...
  resources:
requests:
  storage: 4Gi

>   throughput: "1.2M"

Author: Isn't that too granular? I was thinking for throughput: MB/s. Iops is IO/s.

  iops: "160000"
// Vendors may add additional resources using Device Plugin syntax: vendor-domain/resourcetype
```

[Device Plugin](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/compute-storage-net/device-plugins/) is out of scope for this KEP and it is one of the options for configure vendor specific storage options.

Add PVC Status field; change ResizeStatus alpha field to AllocatedResourceStatus map.

### CSI API
The CSI create request will be extended to add provisioned IO parameters. A new ControllerUpdateIOProvisioning RPC will be added.

```
// ControllerServer is the server API for Controller service.
type ControllerServer interface {
        ...

>         ControllerUpdateIOProvisioning(context.Context, *ControllerUpdateIOProvisioningRequest) (*ControllerUpdateIOProvisioningResponse, error)

Reviewer 2: I wonder if we should add a ModifyVolume PRC but only allow IO changes for now.  In the future, if we decide to support other updates, we don't have to add another PRC.

Author: We can discuss this in today's meeting.

}
type ControllerUpdateIOProvisioningResponse struct {
        Iops int64
        Throughput int64
}
```

### Quota
Resize quota works by using Kubernetes resource quotas, which makes sure the cluster administrators and operators can restrict consumption and creation of cluster resources (such as CPU time, memory, and persistent storage) within a specified namespace. The LimitRange admission controller tracks usage to ensure the storage resource does not exceed resource minimum, maximum and ratio defined in any LimitRange present in the namespace.

```
apiVersion: v1
kind: ResourceQuota
metadata:
  name: quota
spec:
  hard:
    limits.iops: "200000"    // max for all containers in the namespace
    limits.throughput: 200
    requests.iops: "2000"    // max per request 
    requests.throughput: 20
    pods: "10"    // max number of pods allowed in the namespace
```

```
apiVersion: v1
kind: LimitRange
metadata:
  name: sample
spec:
  limits:
  - max:
      iops: 1500
      throughput: 10
    min:
      iops: 10
      throughput: 1
    default:
      iops: 100
      throughput: 5
    defaultRequest:
      iops: 100
      throughput: 20
    type: Container   
```

> QoS should have similar issues to resize (except that we have to solve reducing IO). Please see [limit storage consumption](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/limit-storage-consumption/). Quota validation should be part of [`func ValidatePersistentVolumeClaimUpdate`](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/apis/core/validation/validation.go#L2257) flow by using [func ValidateResourceQuota](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/5bb7326c3643f52a7b615e6f63911add4bbcab3b/pkg/apis/core/validation/validation.go#L6113) and [func ValidateLimitRange](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/5bb7326c3643f52a7b615e6f63911add4bbcab3b/pkg/apis/core/validation/validation.go#L5594). 

Author: In the current CSI spec: 
```
If a volume corresponding to the specified volume ID is already larger than or equal to the target capacity of the expansion request, the plugin SHOULD reply 0 OK.
```
We can specify that for iops/throughput, there is not such restrictions.

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

Cloud providers and storage vendors offer volumes which allow specifying IO performance parameters like IOPS or throughput and tuning them as workloads operate. ([1](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/requesting-ebs-volume-modifications.html), [2](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/disks/extreme-persistent-disk), [3](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/disks-types#premium-ssd-v2), [4](https://www.alibabacloud.com/help/en/elastic-compute-service/latest/essd-autopl)). While these parameters can be specified as storage class parameters to be set at provisioning time, Kubernetes has no API which allows changing them. Only capacity can be changed through the volume expansion API. This KEP proposes an extension to the Kubernetes Persistent Volume API to allow users to dynamically control these volume options.

## Motivation

### Goals

* Cloud-provider and storage vendor independent specification of basic QoS parameters

> * Specifying QoS at volume creation

Reviewer 6: What changes will be made to the CSI and/or Kubernetes spec to support this at volume creation? Should vendor specific QoS StorageClass parameters be considered obsolete?

Author: Vendor specific parameters are not considered in this KEP. The CSI/K8s API changes are listed below.

    PersistentVolumeClaimControllerUpdateThroughputInProgress ClaimResourceStatus = "ControllerUpdateThroughputInProgress"
    PersistentVolumeClaimControllerUpdateThroughputPending ClaimResourceStatus = "ControllerUpdateThroughputPending"
    PersistentVolumeClaimControllerUpdateThroughputFailed ClaimResourceStatus = "ControllerUpdateThroughputFailed"
)
// PersistentVolumeClaimStatus represents the status of PV claim
type PersistentVolumeClaimStatus struct {
    ...
    // AllocatedResourceStatus stores a map of resource that is being expanded
    // and possible status that the resource exists in.
    // Some examples may be:
    //  pvc.status.allocatedResourceStatus["storage"] = "ControllerResizeInProgress"
    //  pvc.status.allocatedResourceStatus["iops"] = "ControllerUpdateIopsInProgress/ControllerUpdateIopsPending/ControllerUpdateIopsFailed"
    //  pvc.status.allocatedResourceStatus["throughput"] = "ControllerUpdateThroughputInProgress/ControllerUpdateThroughputPending/ControllerUpdateThroughputFailed"
    AllocatedResourceStatus map[ResourceName]ClaimResourceStatus
}
```

> 4. Add new CSI API ControllerUpdateIOProvisioning, when there is a change of iops/throughput in PVC, external-resizer triggers a ControllerUpdateIOProvisioning operations against a CSI endpoint.

Reviewer 6: What happens if a user modifies storage capacity and QoS parameters at the same time? Will volume expansion and QoS changes trigger 2 different RPC calls against the driver (ControllerExpandVolume and ControllerUpdateIOProvisioning) or will the RPC calls be coalesced into one? For various SPs (e.g., AWS, Azure), these RPC calls translate to the same upstream API call.

> 

Reviewer 6: Assuming it’s two separate RPC calls, what’s the expected order of operation? The KEP is ambiguous on that front. Are `ControllerExpandVolume` and `NodeExpandVolume` expected to finish before the call to `ContrllerUpdateIOProvisioning` or can they happen in parallel?

Author: The suggestion from the meeting was to do it parallel but the KEP is not updated yet.

5. Update quota code to use min and max(pvc.Spec.Resources, pvc.Status.AllocatedResources) for ProvisionedIOPS and ProvisionedThroughput when evaluating usage for PVC.

![Update Provisioned IO Flow](./qos_flow.png)

Whenever resize controller or kubelet modifies pvc.Status (such as when setting both AllocatedResources and AllocatedResourceStatus) - it is expected that all changes to pvc.Status are submitted as part of same patch request to avoid race conditions.

> IO provisioning parameters can be considered as best-effort parameters, we should report the status of bad parameters and the volume would fall back to a workable default configuration.

Reviewer 6: Need clarification on what ‘best-effort’ means. What’s the expected behavior in case of illegal configurations? What’s the expected behavior in case a driver is able to handle of subset of requested QoS changes?

Author: Define illegal configurations?

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

Cloud providers and storage vendors offer volumes which allow specifying IO performance parameters like IOPS or throughput independenctly from capacity and tuning them as workloads operate. ([1](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/requesting-ebs-volume-modifications.html), [2](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/disks/extreme-persistent-disk), [3](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/disks-types#premium-ssd-v2), [4](https://www.alibabacloud.com/help/en/elastic-compute-service/latest/essd-autopl)). While these parameters can be specified as storage class parameters to be set at provisioning time, Kubernetes has no API which allows changing them. Only capacity can be changed through the volume expansion API. This KEP proposes an extension to the Kubernetes Persistent Volume API to allow users to dynamically control these volume options.

## Motivation

> In real life, workloads do vertical scaling until certain points but then start to do partition, at the same time provide a software layer to tweak key parameters like iops/throughput.

Reviewer 7: May I suggest a rewording of this paragraph?
```suggestion
In practice, workloads may scale vertically up to a certain point but then must partition horizontally. In order to scale storage performance vertically, attributes such as iops/throughput must be changed.
```
Something like that

Author: That is not what i meant, i meant that after scale vertically to a point, and then start to use software to manage attributes like iops/throughput.

Currently after CreateVolume with provider specific parameters pass in storage class, Kubernetes does not handle update of QoS related parameters update. The only way to achieve this is to use the cloud provider's API directly to modify iops and throughput. This creates frictions of managing storage resources on k8s. Allowing Resources to be changed without managing it through different provider's APIs directly simplifies this whole process.

### Goals

> * Cloud-provider and storage vendor independent specification of basic QoS parameters

Reviewer 7: Another goal is to have the QoS enforcement performed by the storage.

* Scheduling based on total IO limits of a node. For example, total throughput for many cloud provider network attached storage volumes is limited by instance network bandwidth and may prevent achieving the provisioned IO. Scheduling to mitigate these factors is out of scope but it should be considered as a future extension of this KEP.

## Proposal

### Kubernetes API
Add two well-known ResourceName keys to the existing ResourceList type used in PersistentVolumeClaim.Spec.Resources.{Limits,Requests} and PersistentVolume.Spec.Capacity:
* (ReadWrite) IOPS independent from capacity
* (ReadWrite) Throughput
These values can be changed on a PersistentVolumeClaim, and will be reconciled against the storage provider in the same way as storage capacity resizing. The status of a PVC will reflect the currently provisioned IO as reported by the storage provider (in the same way that the status states the current size of the volume during a resize operation).

```
// Example:
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
...
spec:
  ...
  resources:
requests:
  storage: 4Gi

>   throughput: "1000M" // MiB/s as unit

Reviewer 7: What is the desired behavior if a driver does not support throughput and/or iops? Should the fields be ignored or should the PVC not be bound?

Author: If the driver does not support iops/throughput, it should return an unretriable error.

Add PVC Status field; change ResizeStatus alpha field to AllocatedResourceStatus map.

### CSI API
The CSI create request will be extended to add provisioned IO parameters. For volume creation, cloud providers can add iops and throughput field in parameters and process in the csi driver, an example:

```
apiVersion: storage.k8s.io/v1
kind: StorageClass
metadata:
  name: csi-gcepd
provisioner: pd.csi.storage.gke.io
parameters:
  type: hyperdisk-balanced
  provisioned-iops-on-create: '10000'
  provisioned-throughput-on-create: '1000Mi'
volumeBindingMode: WaitForFirstConsumer
```

A new ControllerModifyVolume RPC will be added. The current spec requires ["If a volume corresponding to the specified volume ID is already larger than or equal to the target capacity of the expansion request, the plugin SHOULD reply 0 OK"](https://github.com/container-storage-interface/spec/blob/master/spec.md). The change here will be if the capacity change is for iops and throughput, we will not require that to be larger than the current configuration.

> #### ControllerModifyVolume

Reviewer 7: Would the driver need to return new capabilities to specify if it can support this?
I imagine we would need a capability for controller modify volume but also a way to know if the driver supports iops and/or throughput. Maybe the latter is the exceeds capabilities error?

type ControllerServer interface {
        ...
        ControllerModifyVolume(context.Context, *ControllerModifyVolumeRequest) (*ControllerModifyVolumeResponse, error)
        ...
}

type ControllerModifyVolumeRequest struct {
        // The ID of the volume to expand. This field is REQUIRED.
        VolumeId string
        Iops string 
        Throughput string
}
type ControllerModifyVolumeResponse struct {
        Iops int64
        Throughput int64
}
```

For future first class QoS parameters, the API fields can be expanded.

The according errors:

| Condition | gRPC Code | Description | Recovery Behavior |
|-----------|-----------|-------------|-------------------|
| Exceeds capabilities | 3 INVALID_ARGUMENT | Indicates that the CO has specified capabilities not supported by the volume. | Caller MAY verify volume capabilities by calling ValidateVolumeCapabilities and retry with matching capabilities. |
| Volume does not exist | 5 NOT FOUND | Indicates that a volume corresponding to the specified volume_id does not exist. | Caller MUST verify that the volume_id is correct and that the volume is accessible and has not been deleted before retrying with exponential back off. |

> | Volume in use | 9 FAILED_PRECONDITION | Indicates that the volume corresponding to the specified `volume_id` could not be updated because it is currently published on a node but the plugin does not have ONLINE expansion capability. | Caller SHOULD ensure that volume is not published and retry with exponential back off. |

Reviewer 7: I guess this hints that there would need to be another capability stating whether volume modify will work for an ONLINE volume

Author: We want to use capabilities in the CSI layer but we do not want to add a new flag to StorageClass.

  ThroughputUsed *resource.Quantity
  ThroughputAvailable *resource.Quantity
}

```

![QoS Flow Diagram](./qos_flow_diagram.png)

### Test Plan

* Basic unit tests for QoS and quota system.
* E2e tests using mock driver to cause failure on create, update and recovering cases
* Test coverage of quota usage with ResourceQuota and LimitRange

##### Prerequisite testing updates

##### Unit tests

##### Integration tests

<!--
This question should be filled when targeting a release.
For Alpha, describe what tests will be added to ensure proper quality of the enhancement.

For Beta and GA, add links to added tests together with links to k8s-triage for those tests:
https://storage.googleapis.com/k8s-triage/index.html
-->

##### e2e tests

<!--
This question should be filled when targeting a release.
For Alpha, describe what tests will be added to ensure proper quality of the enhancement.

For Beta and GA, add links to added tests together with links to k8s-triage for those tests:
https://storage.googleapis.com/k8s-triage/index.html

We expect no non-infra related flakes in the last month as a GA graduation criteria.
-->

### Graduation Criteria

#### Alpha

> - Feature in 1.28 behind the VolumeProvisionedIO feature gate which is set to a default of false

Reviewer 7: Will this be possible? I ask because this feature seems to depend on changes to the CSI spec

Author: This is open for discussion, I do not know what is the general timeline look like when we want to make change in CSI spec + API change(someone said it is possible but it is tight), the spec is in review https://github.com/container-storage-interface/spec/pull/544

high level (needs more precise definitions) those may be things like:
  - per-day percentage of API calls finishing with 5XX errors <= 1%
  - 99% percentile over day of absolute value from (job creation time minus expected
    job creation time) for cron job <= 10%
  - 99.9% of /health requests per day finish with 200 code

These goals will help you determine what you need to measure (SLIs) in the next
question.
-->

###### What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to determine the health of the service?

- [ ] Metrics
    - Metric name: `controller_update_io_provisioning_errors_total` and `controller_update_io_provisioning_errors_total`
    - [Optional] Aggregation method:
    - Components exposing the metric: external-resizer

###### Are there any missing metrics that would be useful to have to improve observability of this feature?

<!--
Describe the metrics themselves and the reasons why they weren't added (e.g., cost,
implementation difficulties, etc.).
-->

### Dependencies

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.
-->

###### Does this feature depend on any specific services running in the cluster?

> No.

Reviewer 7: It's going to make use of the external-resizer side-car yes?

Author: Yes. We discussed the possibility of having a different sidecar, but decided not too, we have too many sidecar to manage right now already.

## Summary

Cloud providers and storage vendors offer volumes which allow specifying IO performance parameters like IOPS or throughput independently from capacity and tuning them as workloads operate. ([1](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/requesting-ebs-volume-modifications.html), [2](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/disks/extreme-persistent-disk), [3](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/disks-types#premium-ssd-v2), [4](https://www.alibabacloud.com/help/en/elastic-compute-service/latest/essd-autopl)). While these parameters can be specified as storage class parameters to be set at provisioning time, Kubernetes has no API which allows changing them. Only capacity can be changed through the volume expansion API. This KEP proposes an extension to the Kubernetes Persistent Volume API to allow users to dynamically control these volume options.

## Motivation

In practice, workloads may scale vertically up to a certain point but then must partition horizontally. The system scales up and down horizontally with partition and at the same time provides a software layer to manage key attributes iops/throughput independently from capacity.

> Currently after CreateVolume with provider specific parameters pass in storage class, Kubernetes does not handle update of QoS related parameters. The only way to achieve this is to use the cloud provider's API directly to modify iops and throughput. This creates frictions of managing storage resources on k8s. Allowing Resources to be changed without managing it through different provider's APIs directly simplifies this whole process. The principle here is that IO provisioning and volume conversions are treated as two separate problems.

Reviewer: "volume conversion" is mentioned without any context. Maybe move that to the non-goals section.

* Scheduling based on total IO limits of a node. For example, total throughput for many cloud provider network attached storage volumes is limited by instance network bandwidth and may prevent achieving the provisioned IO. Scheduling to mitigate these factors is out of scope but it should be considered as a future extension of this KEP.

## Proposal

### Kubernetes API
Add two well-known ResourceName keys to the existing ResourceList type used in PersistentVolumeClaim.Spec.Resources.{Limits,Requests} and PersistentVolume.Spec.Capacity:
* (ReadWrite) IOPS independent from capacity
* (ReadWrite) Throughput
These values can be changed on a PersistentVolumeClaim, and will be reconciled against the storage provider in the same way as storage capacity resizing. The status of a PVC will reflect the currently provisioned IO as reported by the storage provider (in the same way that the status states the current size of the volume during a resize operation).

```
// Example:
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
...
spec:
  ...
  resources:
requests:
  storage: 1024Gi
  throughput: 100 // MiB/s as unit

>   iops: 1000     // IO/s as unit

Reviewer 7: for throughput and iops, does this mean "at least" this much, "exactly" this much, or "approximately" this much? Currently, the "requests" sections on Pod and PVC means "at least" this much. We could have a new "attributes" section.

Author: In current providers(AWS, GCP, Azure) context, the definition is that these resources are reserved and guaranteed, which means if you configure the workload correctly, this value should be exactly.

Reviewer 8: ack on adding a new `attributes` optional field, it could be an arbitary string, e.g. there is a requirement, on aws or azure, user wants to change volume type, so if we have following new optional field, that would be great.
```
spec:
  ...
  resources:
requests:
  storage: 1024Gi
  throughput: 100 // MiB/s as unit
  iops: 1000     // IO/s as unit
  attributes: "volume_type: gp3"  // optional, change volume type to gp3
```

The provider SHOULD provide independent performance fine tuning of read/write iops and read/write throughput defined in this API. Current cloud providers like AWS, GCP and Azure have already provided APIs to fine tune independent iops and throughput. An example is iops per GB. A provider may link these parameters but this is not encouraged due to the change cannot be counted for k8s quota and limit. Instead they should use capacity like it is done today.

```protobuf
// ControllerServer is the server API for Controller service.
type ControllerServer interface {
        ...
        ControllerModifyVolume(context.Context, *ControllerModifyVolumeRequest) (*ControllerModifyVolumeResponse, error)
        ...
}

message ModifyVolumeRequest {
  // Contains identity information for the existing volume.
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  int64 volume_id = 1
  // This field is OPTIONAL.This allows the CO to specify the
  // iops of the volume to be updated to. The unit is IO per
  // second per volume. 
  // If specified it MUST always be honored.
  // A value of 0 is equal to an unspecified field value.

>   int64 iops = 2

Reviewer 7: What is the value of these being first-class fields instead of just having a catch all field?
map[string]string attributes

This would allow the plugin to have it's own fields it can react to.

Accordingly, new events related to this API should be added to [external-resizer](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/external-resizer/blob/master/pkg/util/events.go):

```
VolumeModifyInProgress = "VolumeModifyInProgress"  // EventTypeNormal
VolumeModifyFailed     = "VolumeModifyFailed"      // EventTypeWarning
VolumeModifySuccess    = "VolumeModifySuccess"     // EventTypeNormal
```

5. Update quota code to use min and max(pvc.Spec.Resources, pvc.Status.AllocatedResources) for ProvisionedIOPS and ProvisionedThroughput when evaluating usage for PVC.

![Modify Volume Flow](./qos_update_flow.png)

Whenever resize controller or kubelet modifies pvc.Status (such as when setting both AllocatedResources and AllocatedResourceStatus) - it is expected that all changes to pvc.Status are submitted as part of same patch request to avoid race conditions.

IO provisioning parameters can be considered as best-effort parameters, we should report the status of bad parameters and the volume would fall back to a workable default configuration.

> 6. Add new operational and usage metrics to NodeGetVolumeStats:

Reviewer: This should also translate to some CSI call.

      how can an operator troubleshoot without logging into a master or worker node?
    - Mitigations: What can be done to stop the bleeding, especially for already
      running user workloads?
    - Diagnostics: What are the useful log messages and their required logging
      levels that could help debug the issue?
      Not required until feature graduated to beta.
    - Testing: Are there any tests for failure mode? If not, describe why.
-->

###### What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the problem?

## Implementation History

<!--
Major milestones in the lifecycle of a KEP should be tracked in this section.
Major milestones might include:
- the `Summary` and `Motivation` sections being merged, signaling SIG acceptance
- the `Proposal` section being merged, signaling agreement on a proposed design
- the date implementation started
- the first Kubernetes release where an initial version of the KEP was available
- the version of Kubernetes where the KEP graduated to general availability
- when the KEP was retired or superseded
-->

## Drawbacks

None that we are aware of

## Alternatives

> * Modify the storage class in the PVC. See this [document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1d5Ch54t8-uyORh56AP7rN9AkQfKuLBsCrrBjOohbWLA/edit?usp=sharing).

Reviewer: It would be good to add more details on why these alternative approaches were not chosen.

Author: This is actually the using a map proposal and we are discussing it right now.
